---
title: 'Forecasting: Getting Started'
date: 2024-11-14T21:50:51+08:00
---
### The Historical Roots of Forecasting

Since the dawn of human civilization, the desire to predict the future has driven human curiosity and exploration. For instance, ancient Chinese practices such as BaZi, oracle bone divination, and lot-drawing, as well as Western methods like tarot reading, reflect humankind's persistent fascination with forecasting. Across cultures, interpreting dreams to glimpse the future has been equally popular. In ancient China, the Taishi Bureau in the Song Dynasty used basic meteorological principles to forecast weather, aiding agricultural and other societal activities. Similarly, the Qintianjian in the Ming Dynasty specialized in astronomical observations and divination for auspicious events. Some of these methods align with modern scientific principles, while others are steeped in mysticism.

Despite humanity's enduring obsession with predicting the future, such activities were once seen as threats to religious and political authority.

Forecasters had a tougher time under the emperor Constantius II, who issued a decree in AD357 forbidding anyone "to consult a soothsayer, a mathematician, or a forecaster ... May curiosity to foretell the future be silenced forever." [^1] A similar ban on forecasting occurred in England in 1824 [^2] when "every person pretending or professing to tell fortunes" was "deemed a rogue and vagabond". The punishment was up to three months' imprisonment with hard labour!

Today, however, forecasting is fundamentally different. In modern society, it is seen as a scientific and analytical tool, widely applied across business, economics, politics, environmental planning, and more. Accurate forecasts are indispensable for organizations, governments, and individuals, guiding their strategies and decisions. No longer dismissed as forbidden sorcery, forecasting has evolved into a highly specialized domain powered by advanced mathematics and cutting-edge technology.

**At its core, humanity's fascination with forecasting stems from an intrinsic drive for knowledge, security, control, and prosperity.**

### Modern Forecasting

The advent of computers has enabled us to process vast amounts of data using powerful algorithms, achieving unprecedented precision in forecasting. Early computer-based forecasting relied on well-defined rules and statistical models, such as linear regression and decision trees, which modeled system behaviors mathematically. However, as technology evolved, forecasting shifted toward more complex methods like deep learning and neural networks. These models excel at uncovering hidden patterns in large-scale data but often operate as black boxes, making their internal mechanisms difficult to interpret.

Today, in my opinion, forecasts generated by complex, uninterpretable networks sometimes bear an uncanny resemblance to predictions made through crystal ball gazing. This lack of interpretability undermines trust and usability, especially in high-stakes fields such as medical diagnosis, autonomous driving, or financial decision-making. This is why we must focus not only on prediction accuracy but also on **interpretability**. Only when the predictive process is transparent and understandable can it provide decision-makers with confidence and mitigate unintended consequences.

### A Journey Into Forecasting

In this series, I will follow in the footsteps of Rob J. Hyndman and George Athanasopoulos, exploring traditional forecasting methods through their book, **Forecasting: Principles and Practice** [^3]. Through this journey, I aim to gain insights into time series forecasting and the importance of interpretability, contributing to a broader understanding of this essential field.

### Reference

[^1]: https://droitromain.univ-grenoble-alpes.fr/Constitutiones/CTh09.html

[^2]: https://statutes.org.uk/site/the-statutes/nineteenth-century/5-geo-iv-c-83-vagrancy-act-1824/

[^3]: https://otexts.com/fpp3/intro.html
